Now let's look at strategies for handling unplanned work. Doesn't it
seem sometimes that most of our work is becoming unplanned? Here are
three examples of types of unplanned work we will discuss in this
section. First, new requirements.
There seems to be a limitless amount of new work in our lives.
Next, changing requirements.
Oh yeah,
remember I said I wanted the checkout process to handle a credit card? Well,
now I want it to handle multiple credit cards and gift cards, too.
Surprise! And hot fixes or got‑to‑haves. I need this right now! Usually
coming from the business or a senior leader.
We will first talk about how Agile Scrum handles unplanned work,
and then we will discuss how Kanban handles it.
Okay, let's drill into each one.
Let's see how we can handle new requirements while
we are in the middle of a Sprint.
The new requirement is added to the backlog, discussed in the next Sprint
planning meeting, and targeted for a future Sprint.
I like that. That's a good option, and it didn't disrupt
the Sprint. Or, the new requirement is added to the backlog
with a great sense of urgency.
Typically in Sprints, the team is to be protected so they do not lose momentum,
and they can produce with predictability.
But in the real world, this could be an important feature,
and there may be management pressure on the Sprint team.
Well, we've all been there. Since in this scenario,
we are assuming it is a new feature or a new user story, you might use any
slack you have in the Sprint to simply assess the feature,
determine the task required to implement, and provide a planning poker
estimate. Else, the new requirement still stays in the backlog.
This will better prepare you for the next Sprint planning meeting,
especially if this new feature was presented to the
team near the end of the Sprint.
Another approach would be to hold an ad hoc Sprint planning meeting
right in the middle of your Sprint, and hopefully get the new
feature planned into the very next Sprint,
or somehow get it included into the current Sprint.
But, of course, that would be breaking your Sprint rules.
Let's see how we might handle changing requirements
while we are in the middle of a Sprint.
You might find yourself in one of these two camps or somewhere in the middle.
We are agile,
so respond to change immediately to maximize business value delivered, or stay
the course, make no mid‑Sprint changes, and maximize the team's productivity,
and wait until the next Sprint planning meeting.
Now, where might you fall in the spectrum?
Below are some important considerations that will help your team
decide if they should accept the change or not.
The size of the change; while taking a small change may enhance
agility, a big change may disrupt the flow of the Sprint.
The timing of the change; changes early in the Sprint may be
preferred, rather than towards the end, of course.
And the frequency of change; are such changes occasional?
Or is the product owner getting into the practice of giving unplanned
requirements and then changing them frequently?
You certainly do not want to encourage that behavior, so push back
professionally and add the backlog for the next Sprint planning meeting.
Lastly,
it's all about genuine and trusting conversations and
negotiations with your product owner and your team.
Trust must work both ways.
Sometimes you will accept the change mid‑Sprint,
and sometimes you won't. Both sides need to accept that and respect each other.
Ideally,
the team will come up with a consistent policy, agreed by all, and hopefully
written down regarding dealing with changes during the Sprint.
Let's see how we will handle hot fixes while we are in the middle of a Sprint.
It is really no different than requirement changes in mid‑Sprint,
except if it is hot and urgent, of course, there will be much
pressure on the team to get it worked out,
and hence, you must at least immediately assess and validate to ensure
it is truly hot and urgent and provide immediate feedback to the source
of the hot fix as to your options. Now,
here are the same considerations we discussed in handling changing
requirements. The size of the change; can you squeeze it in by using slack, or
not doing another user story, for example. The timing of the change; hot fixes
early in the Sprint will obviously be easier than hot fixes later in the
Sprint. And the frequency of the change; if this hot fix approach is overused
or oversold by the product owner,
you will need to professionally push back and place on the
backlog for the next Sprint planning meeting.
And again,
I can't stress this more to you, it is all about solid and trusting
conversations and negotiations with your product owner and your team.
This is gold! If you have a great relationship and you have trust both ways,
working these issues out, because there will be issues, and there will be
challenges, and it'll be so much better and smoother with a great
relationship that's trusting and bidirectional.
Now let's switch over to Kanban and see how we will handle new requirements
during work in progress. With new requirements, they simply go into the
backlog, and during the day, stand up will be discussed,
prioritized, and tweeted like any other work item. If the new requirement
is added to the backlog with a great sense of urgency,
then during the next stand up,
the team will discuss the new urgent requirement and place it
in the priority one portion of the backlog.
Once there, it can now be the next work item to be pulled forward.
But if this new item is super urgent,
the team could decide to pause on a work‑in‑progress item in the first
step of the value stream. The work item card they're working on can
remain in that value stream step and the card marked as paused or
temporary hold or something like that.
That pause card is now the next number one priority when the
next resource comes up for air in that particular step. And
by using your daily standups,
you can fine‑tune or adjust the workflow of this super urgent new requirement.
After the urgent item is done,
the resource can simply place the urgent item in the done buffer
for their step, and then restart the paused item and change its
status from paused to work in progress.
Each resource in the value stream would handle the urgent item the same. Put
a temporary hold on the current item they're working on and pull forward the
urgent work from the upstream's done buffer.
Now, this is very straightforward, and remember,
with Kanban, you can create your own schemes that better fit your needs.
Let's see how we will handle changing requirements while
work is in progress in Kanban. Here are the same
considerations as with Agile Scrum.
How many work items are affected? A feature or user story may have been
broken down to multiple Kanban work items or cards,
all scattered across the value stream.
Where in the workflow are the affected work items, early or late?
Certainly, if they are early,
it may have less impact, and if later in the workflow, there
may be much more of a workflow impact. What is the implication
or consequences of the change?
Can you simply tweak a few work item cards?
Or is the change so significant that you have to stop or
cancel some work items and start new work items from the
beginning of the value stream?
Those are the decisions you'll have to make.
And again,
it's all about solid and trusting conversations and
negotiations with your product owner or customers and your
team to come to the optimal solution.
Let's see how we'll handle hot fixes in Kanban.
It is similar to requirement changes, except if it's hot and urgent, of course,
there'll be much more pressure on the team,
but I really think less pressure than on a Scrum team.
You will have more flexibility and choices to solve this tough problem.
So call an ad hoc stand up and assess the hot fix and provide immediate
feedback to the source of the hot fix as to your options.
And here are those considerations again.
Number of work items affected.
Look at those. Where in the workflow are the affected work items, early
or late? Remember, earlier is easier to handle than late. What are the
implications or consequences of the change?
Look how big or small those consequences are in your
decision. And always nurture healthy,
constructive communication, which promotes trust.
Let's recap work in progress. For new requirements and for Scrum,
place on the backlog or use slack, and for Kanban,
place in the backlog or follow your normal process.
Remember, there's no slack in Kanban. For changing requirements, for Scrum,
disrupt the Sprint, or wait until the next Sprint planning session.
And for Kanban, pause work,
pull change forward, or follow the normal process of just
placing in the backlog and address it during the next stand
up. For hot fixes for Scrum,
disrupt the Sprint, or wait until the next Sprint planning
session. And for Kanban, pause work, and pull change
forward, or follow normal process.
But in both cases,
you need to consider the number of work items affected and
the implications that this hot fix may have to the flow and
quality of the work in progress.
And in all cases,
I believe that Kanban provides the most flexibility in
choosing how to solve the challenge, as well as better visibility into the remediation of the challenge.